The following template is an example of how to write your own op-ed supporting public health
efforts. The template is divided into two sections: the first section provides guidance and notes
on the structure when crafting an op-ed while the second section provides an example of op-ed
written from the provider’s perspective. The example was originally written as an article in the
magazine of a county medical society in coordination with the development of a new county
initiative and published by CMA via our website. Op-eds can also be published through local
news outlets and other sources. Organizations, such as CMA, may have media contacts that can
help you find the appropriate audience for your op-ed. While the example op-ed provided is
specific to sugar-sweetened beverage, you can use this format as a general advocacy template
and insert your own personal experiences, local data, and initiatives. The most important
elements to remember are:
 Present the problem and give it a human touch. Supporting data is important but it will
fall flat if you don’t demonstrate what it means for readers. Do you have an experience
with one of your patients that you can share? Providers have a powerful voice and can
contribute to personalizing advocacy issues for the readers that data alone may not be
able to do.
 Offer a solution – what local programs or initiatives are you supporting? What can still
be done to help? Be sure to show why these solutions are effective.
 Include a call to action – success is a community effort.
STRUCTURE & GUIDANCE
Heading TITLE
DATE
AUTHOR, TITLE, CREDENTIALS
The Opener The first paragraph of your op-ed should set up the problem. Notice here, the
author starts with local data that drives home the message that obesity is a
problem in the local community.
The rest of the paragraph demonstrates the different ways that the problem can
affect the health of community members, regardless of age, gender and other
factors. This puts a human face on the problem – an important part of any op-ed.
The paragraph concludes with a sentence that hints at finding a solution: these
problems are largely preventable. This acts as a nice transition to the next
paragraph.
The Body The second paragraph of the op-ed should present your solution. Notice the
author uses the first few sentences of this paragraph to restate the problem and
offer a solution: cutting back on sugar-sweetened beverages. The effectiveness
of the solution is then supported by data that proves the link between sugarsweetened beverages and obesity.
The next two paragraphs provide examples of the specific public health
initiatives that the author is supporting – from a county-wide resolution, to
efforts in specific neighborhoods that are most impacted. It is important to
demonstrate that there are many ways to combat this problem on all levels –
from statewide solutions to everyday tips that individuals can use to improve
their daily diet.
The Call to
Action
The concluding paragraph acts as a call to action. It reminds readers that solving
the problem will take time, dedication and cooperation. It invites readers to
become part of the solution in their communities.
EXAMPLE
Heading Going soda free in Marin to combat obesity
September 26, 2013
By Matthew Willis, MD, MPH • Dr. Willis is the Public Health Officer for
Marin County
The Opener Nearly one in three children in Marin, and nearly one in two adults, is
overweight or obese. Local health care providers see the impact of obesity every
day, across the age spectrum: an 18-month-old whose weight continues to climb
above the 95th percentile; a 10-year-old obese boy who is bullied in school and
depressed; a 16-year-old girl with hypertension and high cholesterol; an
overweight young woman with gestational diabetes; a 50-year-old obese woman
with debilitating knee arthritis; a 65-year-old man with congestive heart failure
and worsening renal function. These routine presentations are largely
preventable.
The Body Obesity is a model condition for partnership between public health and clinical
medicine because it is epidemic, preventable and curable. As one important step
in combating obesity, public health practitioners in Marin County are taking
steps to limit the harmful consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages. According
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, consumption of these
beverages (including soda, sweetened juices, and sports and energy drinks) is a
major driver of the obesity epidemic. Over the past decade, per capita intake of
calories from sugar-sweetened beverages has increased by nearly 30 percent
nationally, partly due to marketing strategies targeted to children and
adolescents. For each extra can or glass of sugared beverage consumed per day,
the likelihood of a child’s becoming obese increases by 60 percent.
This summer, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), supported
by a resolution from the Marin County Board of Supervisors, partnered with
LIFT-Levantate and the Marin City Community Services District to promote
Soda Free Summer. This initiative included education on how to read labels to
determine the amount of sugar and how to make healthy refreshing water drinks
with the addition of fresh fruit and herbs. The Marin County Nutrition Wellness
Program (NWP) hosted trainings and events on how to Rethink Your Drink
throughout the summer at a variety of community based organizations and
summer programs for youth.
In addition, the NWP worked with community leaders in the Canal District and
Marin City to help reduce access to sugar-sweetened beverages in these
neighborhoods. Childhood obesity rates are higher in these communities than in
other parts of Marin. These high rates increase the risk of diabetes and other
strong cardiovascular risk factors, perpetuating the disparities we are already
seeing in life expectancy in Marin. The current gap in life expectancy between
the wealthiest and poorest neighborhoods in Marin is 17 years.
The Call to
Action
The Soda Free Summer is a small but important step toward changing norms
around consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages. The solution to the growing
burden of obesity must be multifaceted and long-term, and it will require
commitments from health care providers, public health advocates, and the
communities and individuals they serve. Last year, soda was removed from all
vending machines in Marin County HHS buildings. Clinics or hospitals that still
sell soda in vending machines are invited to join in the spirit of Soda Free
Summer. Removing soda from vending machines demonstrates an understanding
of the evidence in combating obesity, and it reminds patients of our role as
stewards of their health